Add docs to accompany KMS v2beta1 changes (#39110)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kms-provider.md

weight: 370
---
<!-- overview -->
This page shows how to configure a Key Management Service (KMS) provider and plugin to enable secret data encryption.
Currently there are two KMS API versions. New integrations that only need to support Kubernetes v1.27+ 

> should use KMS v2 as it offers significantly better performance characteristics than v1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
should use KMS v2 as it offers significantly better performance characteristics than v1 (note the `Caution` below for specific cases when KMS v2 must not be used).
```

Set `--feature-gates=KMSv2=true` to configure a KMS v2 provider.

* Your cluster must use etcd v3 or later

{{< caution >}}
The KMS v2 API and implementation changed in incompatible ways in-between the alpha release in v1.25
and the beta release in v1.27.  Attempting to upgrade from old versions with the alpha feature
enabled will result in data loss.
{{< /caution >}}

<!-- steps -->

The KMS encryption provider uses an envelope encryption scheme to encrypt data in etcd.
The data is encrypted using a data encryption key (DEK).
The DEKs are encrypted with a key encryption key (KEK) that is stored and managed in a remote KMS.
With KMS v1, a new DEK is generated for each encryption.
With KMS v2, a new DEK is generated on server startup and when the KMS plugin informs the API server
that a KEK rotation has occurred (see `Understanding key_id and Key Rotation` section below).
The KMS provider uses gRPC to communicate with a specific KMS plugin over a UNIX domain socket.
The KMS plugin, which is implemented as a gRPC server and deployed on the same host(s)
as the Kubernetes control plane, is responsible for all communication with the remote KMS.

{{< caution >}}

> If you are running Virtual machine (VM) based nodes and if you use VM state store with this feature, VM save state and restore operations are not supported with KMS v2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are running virtual machine (VM) based nodes that leverage VM state store with this feature, you must not use KMS v2.
```

> The API server uses AES-GCM with a 12 byte nonce (8 byte atomic counter and 4 bytes random data) for encryption. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With KMS v2, the API server uses AES-GCM with a 12 byte nonce (8 byte atomic counter and 4 bytes random data) for encryption. 
```

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.12" state="beta" >}}

### KMS v2

> * Kubernetes version 1.27.0 or later is required

Reviewer 2: For k8s 1.25, this feature is available, right?

Reviewer 3: It is (in alpha). We should do our usual thing and use a feature state shortcode, then add explanatory text about what to do for earlier versions.

> * Kubernetes version 1.27.0 or later is required

Reviewer 3: ```markdown
{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.27" state="something" >}}
```

> * Kubernetes version 1.27.0 or later is required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.27" state="beta" >}}
```

* For version 1.25 and 1.26, enabling the feature via kube-apiserver feature gate is required: `--feature-gates=KMSv2=true` to configure a KMS v2 provider

* Your cluster must use etcd v3 or later

> {{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.27" state="beta" >}}

Reviewer 3: and omit this.

* Your cluster must use etcd v3 or later

{{< note >}}

The KMS v2 API and implementation changed in incompatible ways in-between the alpha release in v1.25
and the beta release in v1.27.  Attempting to upgrade between these versions with the alpha feature
enabled will result in data loss.

{{< /note >}}

<!-- steps -->

The KMS encryption provider uses an envelope encryption scheme to encrypt data in etcd.
The data is encrypted using a data encryption key (DEK).
The DEKs are encrypted with a key encryption key (KEK) that is stored and managed in a remote KMS.
With KMS v1, a new DEK is generated for each encryption.
With KMS v2, a new DEK is generated on server startup and when the KMS plugin informs the API server
that a KEK rotation has occurred (see `key_id` section below).
The KMS provider uses gRPC to communicate with a specific KMS plugin over a UNIX domain socket.
The KMS plugin, which is implemented as a gRPC server and deployed on the same host(s)
as the Kubernetes control plane, is responsible for all communication with the remote KMS.

{{< caution >}}

> Virtual machine (VM) save state and restore operations are not supported with KMS v2.

Author: Because users could be using the KMS v2 feature with VM save state and we want to warn users of known issues.

> Virtual machine (VM) save state and restore operations are not supported with KMS v2.

Reviewer 2: The assumption is that users are running VMs as k8s worker nodes, right?
That assumption doesn't always hold true.

> Virtual machine (VM) save state and restore operations are not supported with KMS v2.

Reviewer: @tengqm there is no assumption here.  All this statement is trying to say is "if you use VM state restore with this feature, bad things will happen."  It is a limitation of the current implementation that can have serious security consequences under one very specific scenario.  We believe that the intersection of users running this feature + with VM based nodes + with VM state restore in-use is small, but we still need to highlight it.

> Virtual machine (VM) save state and restore operations are not supported with KMS v2.

Reviewer 2: Okay. Then I'd suggest we add a presumption here, something like "If you are running VM-based nodes and ...".

The jumping into VM state save/restore discussion doesn't flow well with the previous paragraphs.
Users may get confused ... is this caution relevant to me?

{{< /caution >}}

<!-- steps -->

The KMS encryption provider uses an envelope encryption scheme to encrypt data in etcd.
The data is encrypted using a data encryption key (DEK).
The DEKs are encrypted with a key encryption key (KEK) that is stored and managed in a remote KMS.
With KMS v1, a new DEK is generated for each encryption.
With KMS v2, a new DEK is generated on server startup and when the KMS plugin informs the API server
that a KEK rotation has occurred (see `key_id` section below).
The KMS provider uses gRPC to communicate with a specific KMS plugin over a UNIX domain socket.
The KMS plugin, which is implemented as a gRPC server and deployed on the same host(s)
as the Kubernetes control plane, is responsible for all communication with the remote KMS.

{{< caution >}}
Virtual machine (VM) save state and restore operations are not supported with KMS v2.

The API server uses AES-GCM with a 12 byte nonce (8 byte atomic counter and 4 bytes random data) for encryption. 
The following issues could occur if the VM is saved and restored:
1. The counter value may be lost or corrupted if the VM is saved in an inconsistent state or restored improperly. 

> This can lead to a situation where the same counter value is used twice, resulting in the same nonce being used 
> for two different messages.

Reviewer 2: Better indent the follow-up lines by 3 spaces for numbered lists.

```suggestion
   This can lead to a situation where the same counter value is used twice, resulting in the same nonce being used 
   for two different messages.
```

2. If the VM is restored to a previous state, the counter value may be set back to its previous value, 
resulting in the same nonce being used again.

Although both of these cases are partially mitigated by the 4 byte random nonce, this can compromise 
the security of the encryption.
{{< /caution >}}

## Configuring the KMS provider

To configure a KMS provider on the API server, include a provider of type `kms` in the
`providers` array in the encryption configuration file and set the following properties:

### KMS v1 {#configuring-the-kms-provider-kms-v1}

> * `apiVersion`: API Version for KMS provider. Leave this value empty or set it to `v1`.

Reviewer 2: A good habit would be always leaving an empty line after a sub-section title line ...

> {{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.12" state="beta" >}}

Reviewer 4: nit: Could we move this to the top after `### KMS v1` for consistency with the v2 stuff?

```suggestion
### KMS v1
{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.12" state="beta" >}}

* Kubernetes version 1.10.0 or later is required

* Your cluster must use etcd v3 or later
```

#### KMS v1 {#developing-a-kms-plugin-gRPC-server-kms-v1}
* Using Go: Use the functions and data structures in the stub file:
  [api.pb.go](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.27/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/storage/value/encrypt/envelope/v1beta1/api.pb.go)
  to develop the gRPC server code 

* Using languages other than Go: Use the protoc compiler with the proto file:
  [api.proto](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.27/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/storage/value/encrypt/envelope/v1beta1/api.proto)
  to generate a stub file for the specific language

#### KMS v2 {#developing-a-kms-plugin-gRPC-server-kms-v2}
* Using Go: Use the functions and data structures in the stub file:
  [api.pb.go](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.27/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/storage/value/encrypt/envelope/v2beta1/api.pb.go)
  to develop the gRPC server code 

* Using languages other than Go: Use the protoc compiler with the proto file:
  [api.proto](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.27/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/storage/value/encrypt/envelope/v2beta1/api.proto)

>   to generate a stub file for the specific language

Reviewer 3: Would [tabs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/hugo-shortcodes/#tabs) work here?

* protocol: UNIX domain socket (`unix`)

  The plugin is implemented as a gRPC server that listens at UNIX domain socket. The plugin deployment should create a file on the file system to run the gRPC unix domain socket connection. The API server (gRPC client) is configured with the KMS provider (gRPC server) unix domain socket endpoint in order to communicate with it. An abstract Linux socket may be used by starting the endpoint with `/@`, i.e. `unix:///@foo`. Care must be taken when using this type of socket as they do not have concept of ACL (unlike traditional file based sockets). However, they are subject to Linux networking namespace, so will only be accessible to containers within the same pod unless host networking is used.

##### KMS v2 {#developing-a-kms-plugin-gRPC-server-notes-kms-v2}

* KMS plugin version: `v2beta1`

  In response to procedure call `Status`, a compatible KMS plugin should return `v2beta1` as `StatusResponse.version`,
  "ok" as `StatusResponse.healthz` and a `key_id` (remote KMS KEK ID) as `StatusResponse.key_id`.

  The API server polls the `Status` procedure call approximately every minute when everything is healthy,

>   and more frequently when the plugin is not healthy.  Plugins must take care to optimize this call as it will be

Reviewer 5: may be beneficial to note the default value here.

Author: We currently mention the default value for status poll is every minute.

Reviewer 5: > and more frequently when the plugin is not healthy
I meant to ask about the frequency when the plugin is not healthy.

Author: will add this

  be marked stale when a no-op write is performed (as described below).  If an `EncryptRequest` procedure call returns a
  `key_id` that is different from `Status`, the response is thrown away and the plugin is considered unhealthy.  Thus
  implementations must guarantee that the `key_id` returned from `Status` will be the same as the one returned by
  `EncryptRequest`.  Furthermore, plugins must ensure that the `key_id` is stable and does not flip-flop between values
  (i.e. during a remote KEK rotation).

  Plugins must not re-use `key_id`s, even in situations where a previously used remote KEK has been reinstated.  For
  example, if a plugin was using `key_id=A`, switched to `key_id=B`, and then went back to `key_id=A` - instead of
  reporting `key_id=A` the plugin should report some derivative value such as `key_id=A_001` or use a new value such
  as `key_id=C`.

  Since the API server polls `Status` about every minute, `key_id` rotation is not immediate.  Furthermore, the API
  server will coast on the last valid state for about three minutes.  Thus if a user wants to take a passive approach

>   to storage migration (i.e. by waiting), they must schedule a migration to occur at `3 + N + M` minutes after the

Reviewer 5: this question stems from my unfamiliarity of storage migration, and could be based on incomplete assumption. AIUI, the storage migration is based on the storageversion hash . Example below.
For storage migration for take effect, which object's storageVersionHash change would trigger the migration? Is `EncryptionConfiguration` GVK change trigger the migration. I understand details of the storage migration are beyond the scope of this documentation 
```
sh-4.2$ kubectl get --raw /api/v1 | jq '.resources[] | select(.name=="secrets")'
{
  "name": "secrets",
  "singularName": "",
  "namespaced": true,
  "kind": "Secret",
  "verbs": [
    "create",
    "delete",
    "deletecollection",
    "get",
    "list",
    "patch",
    "update",
    "watch"
  ],
  "storageVersionHash": "S6u1pOWzb84="
}
```

Author: Storage migration can be triggered either via the storage version migrator or a manual invocation of `kubectl get secrets --all-namespaces -o json | kubectl replace -f - ` to encrypt all existing Secrets with the new key or decrypt all if the `identity` provider is the first entry in the `EncryptionConfiguration` file.

Reviewer: > AIUI, the storage migration is based on the storageversion hash

The `storageVersionHash` field is deprecated and will be removed in a future release.  It is also not aware of encryption at rest, and thus `storageVersionHash` has no meaning in relation to KMS v2.

* protocol: UNIX domain socket (`unix`)

  The plugin is implemented as a gRPC server that listens at UNIX domain socket. 
  The plugin deployment should create a file on the file system to run the gRPC unix domain socket connection. 
  The API server (gRPC client) is configured with the KMS provider (gRPC server) unix 
  domain socket endpoint in order to communicate with it. 
  An abstract Linux socket may be used by starting the endpoint with `/@`, i.e. `unix:///@foo`. 
  Care must be taken when using this type of socket as they do not have concept of ACL 
  (unlike traditional file based sockets). 
  However, they are subject to Linux networking namespace, so will only be accessible to 
  containers within the same pod unless host networking is used.

### Integrating a KMS plugin with the remote KMS

The KMS plugin can communicate with the remote KMS using any protocol supported by the KMS.
All configuration data, including authentication credentials the KMS plugin uses to communicate with the remote KMS,
are stored and managed by the KMS plugin independently.
The KMS plugin can encode the ciphertext with additional metadata that may be required before sending it to the KMS

> for decryption (KMS v2 makes this process easier by providing a dedicated `annotations` field).

Reviewer 5: may help to note a usecase/example that uses the annotations field

Reviewer: 1. You could store the nonce used in the encryption in the annotations field instead of having it be part of the returned ciphertext.
2. If there was some audit ID in the remote KMS to was tied to the particular encryption, it could be stored in an annotation.
3. ...

Author: added

##### KMS v2 {#developing-a-kms-plugin-gRPC-server-notes-kms-v2}

* KMS plugin version: `v2beta1`

  In response to procedure call `Status`, a compatible KMS plugin should return `v2beta1` as `StatusResponse.version`,
  "ok" as `StatusResponse.healthz` and a `key_id` (remote KMS KEK ID) as `StatusResponse.key_id`.

  The API server polls the `Status` procedure call approximately every minute when everything is healthy,
  and every 10 seconds when the plugin is not healthy.  Plugins must take care to optimize this call as it will be
  under constant load.

* Encryption

  The `EncryptRequest` procedure call provides the plaintext and a UID for logging purposes.  The response must include
  the ciphertext, the `key_id` for the KEK used, and, optionally, any metadata that the KMS plugin needs to aid in
  future `DecryptRequest` calls (via the `annotations` field).  The plugin must guarantee that any distinct plaintext
  results in a distinct response `(ciphertext, key_id, annotations)`.

  If the plugin returns a non-empty `annotations` map, all map keys must be fully qualified domain names such as

>   `example.com`. An example use case of `annotation` is `{"kms.kubernetes.io/remote-kms-auditid":"<audit ID used by the remote KMS>"}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `example.com`. An example use case of `annotation` is `{"kms.example.com/remote-kms-auditid":"<audit ID used by the remote KMS>"}`
```

  The plugin is implemented as a gRPC server that listens at UNIX domain socket. The plugin deployment should create a file on the file system to run the gRPC unix domain socket connection. The API server (gRPC client) is configured with the KMS provider (gRPC server) unix domain socket endpoint in order to communicate with it. An abstract Linux socket may be used by starting the endpoint with `/@`, i.e. `unix:///@foo`. Care must be taken when using this type of socket as they do not have concept of ACL (unlike traditional file based sockets). However, they are subject to Linux networking namespace, so will only be accessible to containers within the same pod unless host networking is used.

##### KMS v2 {#developing-a-kms-plugin-gRPC-server-notes-kms-v2}

> * kms plugin version: `v2beta1`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* KMS plugin version: `v2beta1`
```

  `EncryptRequest`.  Furthermore, plugins must ensure that the `key_id` is stable and does not flip-flop between values
  (i.e. during a remote KEK rotation).

  Plugins must not re-use `key_id`s, even in situations where a previously used remote KEK has been reinstated.  For
  example, if a plugin was using `key_id=A`, switched to `key_id=B`, and then went back to `key_id=A` - instead of
  reporting `key_id=A` the plugin should report some derivative value such as `key_id=A_001` or use a new value such
  as `key_id=C`.

  Since the API server polls `Status` about every minute, `key_id` rotation is not immediate.  Furthermore, the API
  server will coast on the last valid state for about three minutes.  Thus if a user wants to take a passive approach
  to storage migration (i.e. by waiting), they must schedule a migration to occur at `3 + N + M` minutes after the
  remote KEK has been rotated (`N` is how long it takes the plugin to observe the `key_id` change and `M` is the
  desired buffer to allow config changes to be processed - a minimum `M` of five minutes is recommend).  Note that no

>   API server restart is required to perform KEK rotation.

Reviewer 2: I'm afraid the above details are more for a developer rather than a kubernetes user.

Author: This whole section is under the `Developing a KMS plugin gRPC server` heading which is intended for developers who are developing KMS plugins.

  example, if a plugin was using `key_id=A`, switched to `key_id=B`, and then went back to `key_id=A` - instead of
  reporting `key_id=A` the plugin should report some derivative value such as `key_id=A_001` or use a new value such
  as `key_id=C`.

  Since the API server polls `Status` about every minute, `key_id` rotation is not immediate.  Furthermore, the API
  server will coast on the last valid state for about three minutes.  Thus if a user wants to take a passive approach
  to storage migration (i.e. by waiting), they must schedule a migration to occur at `3 + N + M` minutes after the
  remote KEK has been rotated (`N` is how long it takes the plugin to observe the `key_id` change and `M` is the
  desired buffer to allow config changes to be processed - a minimum `M` of five minutes is recommend).  Note that no
  API server restart is required to perform KEK rotation.

  {{< caution >}}  
  Because you don't control the number of writes performed with the DEK, we recommend rotating the KEK at least every 90 days.
  {{< /caution >}}

* protocol: UNIX domain socket (`unix`)

>   The plugin is implemented as a gRPC server that listens at UNIX domain socket. The plugin deployment should create a file on the file system to run the gRPC unix domain socket connection. The API server (gRPC client) is configured with the KMS provider (gRPC server) unix domain socket endpoint in order to communicate with it. An abstract Linux socket may be used by starting the endpoint with `/@`, i.e. `unix:///@foo`. Care must be taken when using this type of socket as they do not have concept of ACL (unlike traditional file based sockets). However, they are subject to Linux networking namespace, so will only be accessible to containers within the same pod unless host networking is used.

Reviewer 2: Please wrap long lines like this for ease of review feedbacks and for downstream localization teams to track changes.

```suggestion
  The plugin is implemented as a gRPC server that listens at UNIX domain socket.
  The plugin deployment should create a file on the file system to run the gRPC UNIX domain socket connection.
  The API server (gRPC client) is configured with the KMS provider (gRPC server) UNIX
  domain socket endpoint in order to communicate with it.
  An abstract Linux socket may be used by starting the endpoint with `/@`, i.e. `unix:///@foo`.
  Care must be taken when using this type of socket as they do not have concept of ACL
  (unlike traditional file based sockets).
  However, they are subject to Linux networking namespace, so they will only be accessible to
  containers within the same Pod unless host networking is used.
```

| KMS configurations | Without Automatic Reload | With Automatic Reload |
| ------------------ | ------------------------ | --------------------- |
| KMS v1 only        | Individual Healthchecks  | Single Healthcheck    |
| KMS v2 only        | Single Healthcheck       | Single Healthcheck    |
| Both KMS v1 and v2 | Individual Healthchecks  | Single Healthcheck    |
| No KMS             | None                     | Single Healthcheck    |

`Single Healthcheck` means that the only health check endpoint is `/healthz/kms-providers`.

`Individual Healthchecks` means that each KMS plugin has an associated health check endpoint based on its location in the encryption config: `/healthz/kms-provider-0`, `/healthz/kms-provider-1` etc.

These healthcheck endpoint paths are hard coded and generated/controlled by the server. The indices for individual healthchecks corresponds to the order in which the KMS encryption config is processed.

At a high level, restarting an API server when a KMS plugin is unhealthy is unlikely to make the situation better.
It can make the situation significantly worse by throwing away the API server's DEK cache.  Thus the general

> recommendation is to ignore KMS healthz checks for liveness purposes, i.e. `/livez?exclude=kms-providers`.

Reviewer: Yes, this refers to the endpoint on the API server.

Until the steps defined in [Ensuring all secrets are encrypted](#ensuring-all-secrets-are-encrypted) are performed, the `providers` list should end with the `identity: {}` provider to allow unencrypted data to be read.  Once all resources are encrypted, the `identity` provider should be removed to prevent the API server from honoring unencrypted data.

For details about the `EncryptionConfiguration` format, please check the
[API server encryption API reference](/docs/reference/config-api/apiserver-encryption.v1/).

## Verifying that the data is encrypted

> Data is encrypted when written to etcd. After restarting your `kube-apiserver`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When encryption at rest is correctly configured, resources are encrypted on write.
After restarting your `kube-apiserver`,
```
